Added Performance section to DataFrames chapter (#114)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/dataframes_performance.md

Like everything in Julia, `DataFrames.jl` can be really fast.
In this section, we will give some performance tips and tricks.

### Allocations

> Like we explained in @sec:function_bang functions that end with a bang `!` are a common pattern to denote functions that modify one or more of their arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like we explained in @sec:function_bang, functions that end with a bang `!` are a common pattern to denote functions that modify one or more of their arguments.
```

> In the context of high performance Julia code, this *means* that **functions with `!` do not perform any sort of allocation**.

Reviewer: I don't that this holds in general. As a counterexample, I can think of a transform operation with some complex logic inside the transformation function.

```
julia> df = DataFrame(A = [1]);

julia> @allocated transform!(df, :A => x -> (rand(100); x))
1168837
```

Author: How do you advise a better phrasing?

Reviewer: Remove the sentence and only mention the in place part.

Author: Can you suggest in the PR so I can see it and apply or edit if necessary?

> They just change in place any object that we supply as arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They just change in-place one of the objects that we supply as arguments.
```

Almost all the `DataFrames.jl` functions that we've seen so far have a \"`!` twin\".
For example, `filter` has a non allocating `filter!`, `select` has `select!`, `subset` has `subset!`, and so on.

> Notice that these functions **do not** return a `DataFrame`, but instead they **alter** the `DataFrame` that they act upon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that these functions **do not** return a new `DataFrame`, but instead they **alter** the `DataFrame` that they act upon.
```

Additionally, there are some functions that do not have a `!` counterpart.

> For example, all the `join`s, by logical purposes, *cannot* be done without allocations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, all the `join`s, for technical reasons, *cannot* be done in place.
```

Author: We are using in-place.

Thus, we don't have any `join!` functions in `DataFrames.jl`.

> If you want the highest speed and performance in your code you should definitely use the `!` functions instead of regular `DataFrames.jl` functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want the highest speed and performance in your code, you should definitely use the `!` functions instead of regular `DataFrames.jl` functions.
```
"You should definitely use [...]" is a sentence which can stand on its own. Therefore, there should be a comma.

Let's go back to the example of the `select` function in the beginning of @sec:select.
Here is the responses `DataFrame`:

```jl
sco("responses()"; process=without_caption_label)
```

Now, let's perform the selection with the `select` function, like we did before:

```jl
s = """
    # allocating function # hide
    select(responses(), :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

And here is the non allocating function:

```jl
s = """
    # non allocarting function # hide
    select!(responses(), :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

> Now let's see how they perform with the `@allocated` macro:

Reviewer: Maybe, add
"The allocated macro tells us how much memory was allocated. In other words, how much new information the computer had to store in its memory while running the code."

Author: Thanks, I've added it.

```jl
s = """
    # allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated select(df, :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

```jl
s = """
    # non allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated select!(df, :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

> As we can see `select!` makes less allocations that `select` so it should be faster while consuming less memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we can see, `select!` allocates less than `select`.
So, it should be faster and while consuming less memory.
```

### Copying vs Not Copying Columns

There are **two ways to access a DataFrame column**.
They differ in how they are accessed: one creates a "view" to the column without copying and the other creates a whole new column by copying the original column.

> The first is the regular dot `.` operator followed by the column name, like in `df.Col`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first is the regular dot `.` operator followed by the column name, like in `df.col`.
```
Below, we used lowercase columns, so maybe here too?

Author: Actually we need to change it all then.

This kind of access **does not copy** the column `Col`.
Instead `df.Col` creates a "view" which is a link to the original column without performing any allocation.
Additionally, the syntax `df.Col` is the same as `df[!, :Col]` with the bang `!` as the row selector.

The second way to access a `DataFrame` column is the `df[:, :Col]` with the colon `:` as the row selector.
This kind of access **does copy** the column `Col`, so beware that it may produce unwanted allocations.

As before, let's try out our two ways to access a column in the responses `DataFrame`:

```jl
s = """
    # allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated col = df[:, :id]
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

```jl
s = """
    # non allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated col = df[!, :id]
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

When we access a column without copying it we are making zero allocations and our code should be faster.

> So, if you don't need a copy always access your `DataFrame`s columns with `df.col` or `df[!, :col]` instead of `df[:, :col]`.

Reviewer: Nice! :rocket: I will go back to this section very often, I think

### CSV.read versus CSV.File

> If you take a look at the help output for `CSV.read` you will see that it is a convenience function identical to a function called `CSV.File` with the same keywords arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you take a look at the help output for `CSV.read`, you will see that it is a convenience function identical to the function called `CSV.File` with the same keywords arguments.
```

Both `CSV.read` and `CSV.File` will read the contents of a CSV file, but they differ in the default behavior.
**`CSV.read`, by default, will not make copies** of the incoming data.

> Instead, `CSV.read` will pass all the data to the second argument (known as "sink").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, `CSV.read` will pass all the data to the second argument (known as the "sink").
```

So, something like this:

```julia
df = CSV.read("file.csv", DataFrame)
```

will pass all the incoming data from `file.csv` to the `DataFrame` sink, thus returning a `DataFrame` type that we store in the `df` variable.

> For the case of **`CSV.File` the default behavior is the opposite: it will make copies of every column contained in the CSV file**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the case of **`CSV.File`, the default behavior is the opposite: it will make copies of every column contained in the CSV file**.
```

> Also the syntax is slight different, we need to wrap anything that `CSV.File` returns in a `DataFrame` constructor function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, the syntax is slightly different.
We need to wrap anything that `CSV.File` returns in a `DataFrame` constructor function:
```

```julia
df = DataFrame(CSV.File("file.csv"))
```

> Or, in a more preferred idiomatic syntax with the pipe `|>` operator:

Reviewer: I remember a discussion a while back where Tamas Papp said that almost in all cases
```
a = f(x)
b = g(a)
```
is better than
```
a = g(f(x))
```
or
```
a = f(x) |> g
```
The reason is pretty straightforward: if you want to debug the first way, you can easily pin the debugger to a specifc point in the operation. Also, you can easily comment out or remove a part of the operation and it's more clear because the intermediate variable can get a clear name.

That said, I don't think it's wrong per se and am curious for your thoughts. I love the pipe operator when I'm doing stuff in the REPL. If you prefer the pipe operator here, then that's fine.

Author: If I do JuliaFormatter.jl to the file it fixes all the pipe stuff. This:

`f(x) |> g`

Becomes:

`g(f(x))`

Reviewer: JuliaFormatter isn't perfect either. It also has some non-idiomatic defaults

Author: I use JuliaFormatter blue code style.
https://domluna.github.io/JuliaFormatter.jl/dev/blue_style/

```julia
df = CSV.File("file.csv") |> DataFrame
```

Like we said, `CSV.File` will make copies of each column in the underlying CSV file.
Ultimately, if you want the most performance, you would definitely use `CSV.read` instead of `CSV.File`.

> That's why we only covered `CSV.read` in @sec:csv.

Reviewer: yeeeeaaahhh for sure :stuck_out_tongue: exactly what I had in mind! :stuck_out_tongue: you expect too much of me :stuck_out_tongue:

Author: Hahahaha

### CSV.jl Multiple Files

> Now let's turn our attention to the `CSV.jl`.

Reviewer: Super cool section! :rocket:

Specially when we have multiple CSV files to read into a single `DataFrame`.
Since version 0.9 of `CSV.jl` we can provide a vector of strings representing filenames.
Before, we needed to perform some sort of multiple file reading and then concatenate vertically the results into a single `DataFrame`.
To exemplify, the code below reads from multiple CSV files and them concatenates vertically using `vcat` them into a single `DataFrame` with the `reduce` function:

```julia
files = filter(endswith(".csv"), readdir())
df = reduce(vcat, CSV.read(file, DataFrame) for file in files)
```

One additional quirk is that `reduce` will not paralelize because it needs to keep the order of `vcat` which follows the same ordering of the `files` vector.

With the new functionality in `CSV.jl` we simply pass the `files` vector into the `CSV.read` function:

```julia
files = filter(endswith(".csv"), readdir())
df = CSV.read(files, DataFrame)
```

> Much more simpler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

By default, **`CategoricalArrays.jl` will use a unsigned integer of size 32 bits `UInt32` to represent the underlying categories**:

```jl
s = """
    typeof(categorical(["A", "B", "C"]))
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

This means that `CategoricalArrays.jl` can represent up to $2^{32}$ different categories in a given vector or column, which is a huge value (close to 4.3 billion).
You probably would never need to have this sort of capacity in dealing with regular data[^bigdata].
That's why `categorical` has a `compress` argument that accepts either `true` or `false` to whether compress or not the underlying categorical data.
If you pass **`compress=true`, `CategoricalArrays.jl` will try to compress the underlying categorical to the smallest possible representation in `UInt`**.
For example, the previous `categorical` vector would be represented as an unsigned integer of size 8 bits `UInt8` (mostly because this is the smallest unsigned integer available in Julia):

> [^bigdata]: also notice that regular data is not big data. So if you are dealing primarily with big data please take caution in capping your categorical values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^bigdata]: also notice that regular data (about <10 000 rows) is not big data (about >100 000 rows). So, if you are dealing primarily with big data please take caution in capping your categorical values.
```
Maybe?

```jl
s = """
    typeof(categorical(["A", "B", "C"]; compress=true))
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

> What does this all means?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What does this all mean?
```

Suppose you have a big vector.

> For example a vector with one million entries, but only 4 underlying categories: A, B, C or D.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a vector with one million entries, but only 4 underlying categories: A, B, C or D.
```

If you do not compress the resulting categorical vector, you will have one million entries stored as `UInt32`.
On the other hand, if you do compress it, you will have one million entries stored instead as `UInt8`.
By using `Base.summarysize` function we can get the underlying size, in bytes, of a given object.
So let's quantify how much more memory we would need to have if we did not compressed our one million categorical vector:

```julia
using Random 
```

```jl
s = """
    one_mi_vec = rand(["A", "B", "C", "D"], 1_000_000)

>     Base.summarysize(categorical(one_mi_vec))

Reviewer: Very nice :+1: :+1:

Like everything in Julia, `DataFrames.jl` can be really fast.
In this section, we will give some performance tips and tricks.

> ### Allocations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### In-place operations 
```

Reviewer 2: The difference between having or not having allocations is a little more than just using a bang !

Like we explained in @sec:function_bang, functions that end with a bang `!` are a common pattern to denote functions that modify one or more of their arguments.

> In the context of high performance Julia code, this *means* that **functions with `!` do not perform any sort of allocation**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the context of high performance Julia code, this *means* that **functions with `!` will just change in-place the objects that we have supplied as arguments.
```

> They just change in-place one of the objects that we supply as arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Almost all the `DataFrames.jl` functions that we've seen so far have a \"`!` twin\".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Almost all the `DataFrames.jl` functions that we've seen have a \"`!` twin\".
```

> For example, `filter` has a non allocating `filter!`, `select` has `select!`, `subset` has `subset!`, and so on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, `filter` has an _in-place_ `filter!`, `select` has `select!`, `subset` has `subset!`, and so on.
```

> Notice that these functions **do not** return a new `DataFrame`, but instead they **alter** the `DataFrame` that they act upon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice that these functions **do not** return a new `DataFrame`, but instead they **update** the `DataFrame` that they act upon.
```

Additionally, there are some functions that do not have a `!` counterpart.
For example, all the `join`s, for technical reasons, *cannot* be done in-place.
Thus, we don't have any `join!` functions in `DataFrames.jl`.

If you want the highest speed and performance in your code, you should definitely use the `!` functions instead of regular `DataFrames.jl` functions.

Let's go back to the example of the `select` function in the beginning of @sec:select.
Here is the responses `DataFrame`:

```jl
sco("responses()"; process=without_caption_label)
```

Now, let's perform the selection with the `select` function, like we did before:

```jl
s = """
    # allocating function # hide
    select(responses(), :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s, process=without_caption_label)
```

> And here is the non allocating function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And here is the _in-place_ function:
```

```jl
s = """
    # non allocarting function # hide
    select!(responses(), :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

The `@allocated` macro tells us how much memory was allocated.

> In other words, how much new information the computer had to store in its memory while running the code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In other words, **how much new information the computer had to store in its memory while running the code**.
```

    df = responses()
    @allocated select(df, :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

```jl
s = """
    # non allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated select!(df, :id, :q1)
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

As we can see, `select!` allocates less than `select`.
So, it should be faster and while consuming less memory.

### Copying vs Not Copying Columns

There are **two ways to access a DataFrame column**.
They differ in how they are accessed: one creates a "view" to the column without copying and the other creates a whole new column by copying the original column.

The first is the regular dot `.` operator followed by the column name, like in `df.col`.
This kind of access **does not copy** the column `col`.
Instead `df.col` creates a "view" which is a link to the original column without performing any allocation.
Additionally, the syntax `df.col` is the same as `df[!, :col]` with the bang `!` as the row selector.

The second way to access a `DataFrame` column is the `df[:, :col]` with the colon `:` as the row selector.
This kind of access **does copy** the column `col`, so beware that it may produce unwanted allocations.

> As before, let's try out our two ways to access a column in the responses `DataFrame`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As before, let's try out these two ways to access a column in the responses `DataFrame`:
```

```jl
s = """
    # allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated col = df[:, :id]
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

```jl
s = """
    # non allocation # hide
    df = responses()
    @allocated col = df[!, :id]
    """
sco(s; process=string, post=plainblock)
```

When we access a column without copying it we are making zero allocations and our code should be faster.
So, if you don't need a copy always access your `DataFrame`s columns with `df.col` or `df[!, :col]` instead of `df[:, :col]`.

### CSV.read versus CSV.File

> If you take a look at the help output for `CSV.read`, you will see that it is a convenience function identical to the function called `CSV.File` with the same keywords arguments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you take a look at the help output for `CSV.read`, you will see that there is a convenience function identical to the function called `CSV.File` with the same keywords arguments.
```

Both `CSV.read` and `CSV.File` will read the contents of a CSV file, but they differ in the default behavior.
**`CSV.read`, by default, will not make copies** of the incoming data.
Instead, `CSV.read` will pass all the data to the second argument (known as the "sink").

So, something like this:

```julia
df = CSV.read("file.csv", DataFrame)
```

> will pass all the incoming data from `file.csv` to the `DataFrame` sink, thus returning a `DataFrame` type that we store in the `df` variable.

Reviewer 2: is this 100% true? when doing the passing is not doing the copying to the DataFrame as well?

Author: Yes taken strictly from the CSV.jl documentation and some discourse threads

For the case of **`CSV.File`, the default behavior is the opposite: it will make copies of every column contained in the CSV file**.
Also, the syntax is slightly different.
We need to wrap anything that `CSV.File` returns in a `DataFrame` constructor function:

```julia
df = DataFrame(CSV.File("file.csv"))
```

Or, in a more preferred idiomatic syntax with the pipe `|>` operator:

```julia
df = CSV.File("file.csv") |> DataFrame
```

Like we said, `CSV.File` will make copies of each column in the underlying CSV file.
Ultimately, if you want the most performance, you would definitely use `CSV.read` instead of `CSV.File`.
That's why we only covered `CSV.read` in @sec:csv.

### CSV.jl Multiple Files

Now let's turn our attention to the `CSV.jl`.
Specially when we have multiple CSV files to read into a single `DataFrame`.
Since version 0.9 of `CSV.jl` we can provide a vector of strings representing filenames.
Before, we needed to perform some sort of multiple file reading and then concatenate vertically the results into a single `DataFrame`.

> To exemplify, the code below reads from multiple CSV files and them concatenates vertically using `vcat` them into a single `DataFrame` with the `reduce` function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To exemplify, the code below reads from multiple CSV files and then concatenates them vertically using `vcat` into a single `DataFrame` with the `reduce` function:
```

```julia
files = filter(endswith(".csv"), readdir())
df = reduce(vcat, CSV.read(file, DataFrame) for file in files)
```

> One additional quirk is that `reduce` will not paralelize because it needs to keep the order of `vcat` which follows the same ordering of the `files` vector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One additional trait is that `reduce` will not paralelize because it needs to keep the order of `vcat` which follows the same ordering of the `files` vector.
```

> With the new functionality in `CSV.jl` we simply pass the `files` vector into the `CSV.read` function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this functionality in `CSV.jl` we simply pass the `files` vector into the `CSV.read` function:
```
soon it will not be new, just the norm.

```julia
files = filter(endswith(".csv"), readdir())
df = CSV.read(files, DataFrame)
```

`CSV.jl` will design a file for each thread available in the computer while it lazily concatenates each thread parsed output into a `DataFrame`.
So we have the **additional benefit of multithreading** that we don't have with the `reduce` option.

### CategoricalArrays.jl compression

If you are handling data with a lot of categorical values, i.e. a lot of columns with textual data that represent somehow different qualitative data, you would probably benefit by using `CategoricalArrays.jl` compression.

> By default, **`CategoricalArrays.jl` will use a unsigned integer of size 32 bits `UInt32` to represent the underlying categories**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, **`CategoricalArrays.jl` will use an unsigned integer of size 32 bits `UInt32` to represent the underlying categories**:
```
